# Project: Data Modeling with Postgres
-----
ETL pipeline developed for startup that wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app.

## Introduction
----
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. My role in this project is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

## Datasets
---
Following Datasets are used for creating the ETL pipepline:
- **Song Dataset**: The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID.

- **Log Dataset**: The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

## Database Schema
Using the song and log datasets, I created a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables:

##### Fact Table:
- The **songplays**  fact table records in log data associated with song plays 

##### Dimension Tables
- The **users** dimension table records users in the app
- The **songs** dimension table records songs in music database
- The **artists** dimension table records artists in music database
- The **time** dimension table stores timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units

## Description of the Project Files
---
1) **sql_queries.py**: This file contain database queries to create and drop the fact and dimension tables. It also contain queries to insert data into these  tables.
2) **create_tables.py**: This file drops and creates database and tables. It first drops (if exists) and creates the sparkify database, establishes connection with the sparkify database and gets cursor to it. Then Drops all the tables (if exists) and creates all tables needed. Finally, closes the connection.
3) **etl.ipynb** : This file reads and processes a single file from **song_data** and **log_data** and loads the data into the tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.
4) **etl.py**: This file reads and processes files from **song_data** and **log_data** and loads them into your tables. 
5) **test.ipynb**: This file displays the first few rows of each table to verify that the data in the tables is correct. It also runs the different test cases to verify that the created ETL pipeline works as expected.

## Instructions to run python scripts
---
- python3 create_tables.py: Create all the required tables in the database
- python3 etl.py: Complete ETL pipeline to perform song play analysis